# Meal-Recommendation-Optimization
Implementing a genetic algorithm for an optimized selection of specified macronutrient meals.

A genetic algorithm (GA) is a method for solving both constrained and unconstrained optimization problems based on a natural selection process that mimics biological evolution. The algorithm repeatedly modifies a population of individual solutions. At each step, the genetic algorithm randomly selects individuals from the current population and uses them as parents to produce the children for the next generation. Over successive generations, the population "evolves" toward an optimal solution. 
 
The project consists of implementing a genetic algorithm to recommend meals based on the three significant types of macronutrients: proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. The body needs these nutrients in larger amounts in order to function properly in addition to other vital nutrients such as water, vitamins, and minerals. In addition, all of these nutrients provide your body with energy measured in the form of calories, the focus of the algorithm will be towards macro rich meals as the base of a diet. Provided is a recipes file to be read by the program which contains meal information such as meal types, calories, macros, and URL links with information to each meal. The links provide a recipe for the meal, list of ingredients, nutrients, and meal preparation instructions. 

When executing the program, the user can set target goals/limits (calories, proteins, carbs, and fats) for the recommended meals. The user also has the option to either include or exclude meal types, this feature was implemented to accommodate unique dietary meal type preferences. By choosing to include a specific meal type, the program allows the user to enter numeric limit of meals for that specific meal type. Once the genetic algorithm has reached an optimal solution, the selection of meals is displayed to the user with the meal's appropriate information (meal type, macros, recipe URL link). Lastly, the macronutrients of the combined meals are displayed to the user.  

It is important to note that genetic algorithms are non-deterministic in method. Thus, the solutions they provide may vary each time you run the algorithm in the same instance. The quality of the results depends highly on: the initial population, genetic operators (crossover, selection, mutation), and probabilities of crossover & mutation. For this project, the implementation of a genetic algorithm aims to recommend a selection of meals that aims to fill the dietary requirements set by the user. Thus, the algorithm's non-deterministic method can provide different meal recommendations that will aim to fulfill the user's target (which is a terrific way to incorporate new foods into your diet). 
